Over the period of these releases, the use and reputation of UNIX began to spread,
first within AT&T, and then beyond. An important contribution to this growing
awareness was the publication of a paper on UNIX in the widely read journal
Communications of the ACM ([Ritchie & Thompson, 1974]).
At this time, AT&T held a government-sanctioned monopoly on the US tele-
phone system. The terms of AT&T’s agreement with the US government prevented
it from selling software, which meant that it could not sell UNIX as a product.
Instead, beginning in 1974 with Fifth Edition, and especially with Sixth Edition,
AT&T licensed UNIX for use in universities for a nominal distribution fee. The
university distributions included documentation and the kernel source code (about
10,000 lines at the time).
AT&T’s release of UNIX into universities greatly contributed to the popularity
and use of the operating system, and by 1977, UNIX was running at some 500 sites,
including 125 universities in the United States and several other countries. UNIX
offered universities an interactive multiuser operating system that was cheap yet
powerful, at a time when commercial operating systems were very expensive. It also
gave university computer science departments the source code of a real operating
system, which they could modify and offer to their students to learn from and
experiment with. Some of these students, armed with UNIX knowledge, became
UNIX evangelists. Others went on to found or join the multitude of startup compa-
nies selling inexpensive computer workstations running the easily ported UNIX
operating system.
In the meantime, US antitrust legislation forced the breakup of AT&T (legal
maneuvers began in the mid-1970s, and the breakup became effective in 1982),
with the consequence that, since it no longer held a monopoly on the telephone
system, the company was permitted to market UNIX. This resulted in the release of
System III (three) in 1981. System III was produced by AT&T’s UNIX Support
Group (USG), which employed many hundreds of developers to enhance UNIX
and develop UNIX applications (notably, document preparation packages and soft-
ware development tools). The first release of System V (five) followed in 1983, and
a series of releases led to the definitive System V Release 4 (SVR4) in 1989, by
which time System V had incorporated many features from BSD, including net-
working facilities. System V was licensed to a variety of commercial vendors, who
used it as the basis of their UNIX implementations.
Thus, in addition to the various BSD distributions spreading through aca-
demia, by the late 1980s, UNIX was available in a range of commercial implementa-
tions on various hardware. These implementations included Sun’s SunOS and later
Solaris, Digital’s Ultrix and OSF/1 (nowadays, after a series of renamings
